docs/PROTOCOL.md, before:

# WSE Wire Protocol Specification

Version: 1 (Rust transport)

> For the cluster inter-node binary protocol, see [Cluster Protocol](CLUSTER_PROTOCOL.md).

## Message Format

All WSE messages are JSON objects with the following structure:

```json
{
  "t": "event_type",
  "id": "019c53c4-abcd-7def-8901-234567890abc",
  "ts": "2026-02-20T15:30:00.000Z",
  "seq": 42,
  "p": {
    "key": "value"
  },
  "v": 1
}
```

### Required Fields

| Field | Type | Description |
|-------|------|-------------|
| `v` | `int` | Protocol version (currently `1`) |
| `id` | `string` | Unique message ID (UUID v7) |
| `t` | `string` | Event type (e.g., `user_update`, `chat_message`) |
| `ts` | `string` | ISO 8601 timestamp with timezone |
| `seq` | `int` | Monotonically increasing sequence number |
| `p` | `object` | Event payload (type-specific data) |

### Optional Fields

| Field | Type | Description |
|-------|------|-------------|
| `sig` | `string` | JWT signature for signed messages |
| `pri` | `int` | Priority (1=BACKGROUND, 3=LOW, 5=NORMAL, 8=HIGH, 10=CRITICAL) |
| `cid` | `string` | Correlation ID for request/response pairing |
| `wse_processing_ms` | `int` | Server-side processing time in milliseconds |

## Message Categories

Messages are prefixed with a category identifier before the JSON payload:

| Prefix | Category | Description | Examples |
|--------|----------|-------------|----------|
| `WSE` | System | Protocol-level messages | `server_ready`, `PING`, `PONG`, `error` |
| `S` | Snapshot | Full state snapshots | `user_snapshot`, `channel_snapshot` |
| `U` | Update | Incremental updates | `user_update`, `chat_message` |

### Wire Format

```
WSE{"t":"server_ready","p":{...},"v":1}
S{"t":"user_snapshot","p":{...},"v":1}
U{"t":"user_update","p":{...},"v":1}
```

The client must strip the prefix before JSON parsing:

```typescript
if (data.startsWith('WSE{')) json = data.slice(3);
else if (data.startsWith('S{') || data.startsWith('U{')) json = data.slice(1);
```

## Transport Modes

### Text Mode (default)

Standard WebSocket text frames with category prefix + JSON.

### Binary Mode: Compression

When a message exceeds the compression threshold (default: 1024 bytes), the server sends a binary frame with `C:` prefix:

```
C:<zlib-compressed-data>
```

The client detects the `C:` prefix, strips it, decompresses with zlib, and parses the resulting JSON string (which still includes the category prefix).

### Binary Mode: Encryption

When encryption is enabled, messages are sent as binary frames with `E:` prefix:

```
E:<IV (12 bytes)><AES-GCM ciphertext + 16-byte auth tag>
```

Encryption spec:

| Parameter | Value |
|-----------|-------|
| Algorithm | AES-GCM-256 |
| IV | 12 bytes (96 bits), random per message |
| Auth tag | 16 bytes (128 bits), appended to ciphertext |
| Key exchange | ECDH P-256 with HKDF-SHA256 |
| HKDF salt | `wse-encryption` (UTF-8 bytes) |
| HKDF info | `aes-gcm-key` (UTF-8 bytes) |
| HKDF hash | SHA-256 |
| Derived key | 32 bytes (256 bits) |

**Key exchange flow:**

1. Server generates ECDH P-256 keypair during connection setup
2. Server sends its public key (65 bytes, uncompressed SEC1) in `server_ready`
3. Client generates its own ECDH keypair
4. Client derives shared secret from server's public key
5. Client sends its public key in `client_hello`
6. Server derives the same shared secret from client's public key
7. Both sides run HKDF to get the AES-256 key
8. All subsequent `E:`-prefixed messages use this key

The plaintext inside the encrypted envelope is the full message including category prefix (e.g. `U{...}`).

### Binary Mode: JSON (default since v1.1)

All JSON messages are sent as WebSocket binary frames instead of text frames. This eliminates UTF-8 validation overhead in the WebSocket layer, providing 5-15% higher throughput. The payload format is identical - category prefix followed by JSON - but delivered in a binary frame.

Clients should handle both text and binary frames containing JSON for backward compatibility.

### Binary Mode: MessagePack

For compact serialization, `M:` prefix indicates msgpack-encoded data:

```
M:<msgpack-encoded-data>
```

To opt in, connect with `?format=msgpack` query parameter:

```
ws://host:port/wse?format=msgpack
```

When enabled, all outbound messages from the server use msgpack instead of JSON. The msgpack payload contains the same fields (`t`, `p`, `id`, `ts`, `seq`, `v`) but encoded with MessagePack. No category prefix is used - the `M:` header replaces it.

Requires `@msgpack/msgpack` (JS) or `msgpack` (Python) on the client side.

## Connection Lifecycle

### 1. Connect

```
Client → Rust Server (port 5006): WebSocket UPGRADE /wse
  Cookie: access_token=<JWT>
Server → Client: 101 Switching Protocols
```

Authentication is via HTTP-only cookie (default name: `access_token`, configurable via `jwt_cookie_name`). No query parameter needed.

### 2. Authentication

Two paths depending on server configuration:

**Rust JWT (when `jwt_secret` is configured):**
1. Rust extracts JWT from cookie header during handshake (cookie name configured via `jwt_cookie_name`, default `access_token`)
2. Rust validates JWT signature, expiry, issuer, audience
3. On success: Rust sends `server_ready` immediately (zero GIL)
4. Rust pushes `AuthConnect{conn_id, user_id}` to drain queue
5. Python receives pre-validated user_id, sets up subscriptions and snapshots

**Python fallback (when `jwt_secret` is not configured):**
1. Rust pushes raw `Connect{conn_id, cookies}` to drain queue
2. Python extracts and validates JWT from cookies
3. Python sends `server_ready` after validation

The Rust JWT path eliminates GIL acquisition from the connection critical path, reducing median connection latency from ~23ms to 0.53ms.

### 3. Server Ready

Sent after authentication succeeds (from Rust when JWT is configured, from Python otherwise):

```json
WSE{"v":1,"t":"server_ready","id":"019c53c4-abcd-7def","ts":"2026-02-28T12:00:00.000Z","seq":1,"p":{
  "message": "Connection established (Rust transport)",
  "details": {
    "version": 1,
    "features": {
      "compression": true,
      "encryption": false,
      "batching": true,
      "priority_queue": true,
      "circuit_breaker": true,
      "rust_transport": true,
      "rust_jwt": true,
      "recovery": true
    },
    "connection_id": "rs_f186cd9d_019c53c4",
    "server_time": "2026-02-28T12:00:00.000Z",
    "user_id": "019c53c4-abcd-7def-8901-234567890abc"
  }
}}
```

When `rust_jwt` is `true`, JWT validation was performed by the Rust server during the handshake (before this message was sent). The `user_id` field is the validated subject from the JWT.

Encryption key exchange happens separately via `encryption_request`/`encryption_response` messages, not in `server_ready`.

### 4. Subscriptions

The Python application subscribes connections to topics via `subscribe_connection(conn_id, topics)`. Subscription management is server-side only - there is no auto-subscribe mechanism.

### 5. Updates

Real-time updates are sent via topic broadcast:

```json
U{"t":"user_update","p":{
  "user_id": "...",
  "status": "online",
  "last_seen": "2026-02-20T15:30:00.123Z"
}}
```

### 6. Heartbeat

Server sends a ping every 25 seconds:

```json
WSE{"t":"ping","p":{"server_time":"2026-02-28T12:00:00.000Z"}}
```

Client responds with a PONG echoing the server timestamp plus its own:

```json
{"t":"PONG","p":{"client_timestamp":1708441800000,"server_timestamp":1708441800050}}
```

### 7. Disconnect

- **Idle timeout**: Server closes after 60s of inactivity (code 1000)
- **Circuit breaker**: Server closes after too many errors (code 1011)
- **Auth failure**: Server closes with code 4401
- **Normal close**: Code 1000

## Presence Events

When presence tracking is enabled, the server broadcasts presence events to all subscribers of a topic.

### Presence Join (server to client)

Sent when the first connection for a user subscribes to a topic with presence data:

```json
{"t": "presence_join", "p": {"user_id": "alice", "data": {"status": "online", "name": "Alice"}}}
```

### Presence Leave (server to client)

Sent when the last connection for a user is removed from a topic:

```json
{"t": "presence_leave", "p": {"user_id": "alice", "data": {"status": "online", "name": "Alice"}}}
```

### Presence Update (server to client)

Sent when a user's presence data is updated via `update_presence()`:

```json
{"t": "presence_update", "p": {"user_id": "alice", "data": {"status": "away"}}}
```

Presence is queried through the Python API (`server.presence(topic)`, `server.presence_stats(topic)`), not through WebSocket messages.

---

## Client-to-Server Messages

### Subscribe / Unsubscribe

Subscribe with optional presence data. The `presence` field attaches user metadata for presence tracking (requires `presence_enabled=True` on the server):

```json
{
  "t": "subscription",
  "p": {
    "action": "subscribe",
    "topics": ["notifications", "chat_messages"],
    "presence": {"status": "online", "name": "Alice"}
  }
}
```

### Sync Request

Request initial data snapshots:

```json
{
  "t": "sync_request",
  "p": {
    "topics": ["notifications", "chat_messages"],
    "include_snapshots": true
  }
}
```

### Client Hello

Protocol negotiation. When encryption is enabled, includes the client's ECDH public key:

```json
{
  "t": "client_hello",
  "p": {
    "client_version": "2.0.0",
    "protocol_version": 2,
    "features": {
      "compression": true,
      "batch_messages": true,
      "encryption": true
    },
    "capabilities": ["compression", "encryption", "batching"],
    "encryption_public_key": "<base64-encoded 65-byte ECDH P-256 public key>"
  }
}
```

Once the server receives `client_hello` with `encryption_public_key`, it derives the shared AES-256 key. All subsequent messages from both sides may be sent as `E:`-prefixed encrypted binary frames.

### Config Update

Dynamic configuration:

```json
{
  "t": "config_update",
  "p": {
    "compression_enabled": true,
    "compression_threshold": 2048,
    "batching_enabled": true,
    "batch_size": 20,
    "batch_timeout": 0.2
  }
}
```

### Health Check

```json
{
  "t": "health_check",
  "p": {}
}
```

### Metrics Request

```json
{
  "t": "metrics_request",
  "p": {}
}
```

## Batching

When the client supports batching (`batch_messages: true` in features), the server may send multiple messages in a single frame:

```json
U{"t":"batch","p":{
  "messages": [
    {"t":"notification","p":{...}},
    {"t":"chat_message","p":{...}}
  ],
  "count": 2
}}
```

## Message Signing

Messages matching a configurable set of types are signed for integrity verification. The set is empty by default - configure via `signed_message_types` in the connection constructor. When `message_signing_enabled` is `True`, all messages are signed.

```json
U{"t":"my_critical_event","p":{...},"sig":"<hash>:<timestamp>:<nonce>:<hmac>","v":1}
```

The `sig` field contains an HMAC-SHA256 signature (or JWT when a TokenProvider is configured):
- `hash`: SHA-256 hash of the JSON-serialized payload
- `signed_at`: Unix timestamp
- `nonce`: Random 16-byte hex string
- `signature`: HMAC-SHA256 of `hash:signed_at:nonce`

Example signed types (domain-specific, not built into WSE):

```
payment_completed, account_transfer, config_change, ...
```

## Error Codes

| Code | Meaning |
|------|---------|
| `AUTH_FAILED` | JWT authentication failed |
| `RATE_LIMITED` | Client sending too fast |
| `MESSAGE_TOO_LARGE` | Message exceeds 1 MB limit |
| `INVALID_SUBSCRIPTION` | No topics specified |
| `INVALID_ACTION` | Unknown subscription action |
| `HANDLER_ERROR` | Server-side handler error (recoverable) |
| `CIRCUIT_BREAKER_OPEN` | Too many errors, connection closing |
| `ENCRYPTION_REQUIRED` | Operation requires encryption |
| `SERVER_ERROR` | Internal server error |
| `INIT_ERROR` | Connection initialization failed |

## WebSocket Close Codes

| Code | Meaning |
|------|---------|
| 1000 | Normal closure / idle timeout |
| 1011 | Server error / circuit breaker |
| 4401 | Authentication required |

## Topics

Topics are application-defined. WSE does not enforce any topic names - define topics that match your domain. Examples:

| Topic | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `notifications` | User notifications |
| `chat_messages` | Chat room messages |
| `system_events` | System-wide announcements |
| `user_presence` | Online/offline status updates |

Subscribe connections to topics in your `drain_inbound()` event handler using `subscribe_connection(conn_id, topics)`.

## Protocol Negotiation

After the WebSocket connection is established and the server sends `server_ready`, the client sends a `client_hello` message to negotiate protocol features, version, and capabilities. The server responds with `server_hello` confirming the negotiated settings.

### Client Hello

Sent by the client immediately after receiving `server_ready`:

```json
{
  "t": "client_hello",
  "p": {
    "client_version": "2.0.0",
    "protocol_version": 1,
    "features": {
      "compression": true,
      "batch_messages": true,
      "encryption": true,
      "msgpack": false
    },
    "capabilities": ["compression", "encryption", "batching"],
    "encryption_public_key": "<base64-encoded 65-byte ECDH P-256 public key>"
  }
}
```

| Field | Type | Description |
|-------|------|-------------|
| `client_version` | `string` | Semantic version of the client library |
| `protocol_version` | `int` | Highest protocol version the client supports |
| `features` | `object` | Feature flags the client wants to enable |
| `capabilities` | `string[]` | List of supported capability names |
| `encryption_public_key` | `string` | Client ECDH public key for key exchange (only when encryption is enabled) |

### Server Hello

Sent by the server in response to `client_hello`:

```json
WSE{
  "t": "server_hello",
  "v": 1,
  "p": {
    "server_version": "2.0.0",
    "protocol_version": 1,
    "features": {
      "compression": true,
      "recovery": true,
      "cluster": false,
      "batching": true,
      "priority_queue": true,
      "msgpack": true
    },
    "limits": {
      "max_message_size": 1048576,
      "rate_limit_capacity": 100000,
      "rate_limit_refill": 10000
    },
    "ping_interval": 25000,
    "connection_id": "conn-abc-123",
    "server_time": "2026-02-28T12:00:00.000Z"
  }
}
```

| Field | Type | Description |
|-------|------|-------------|
| `server_version` | `string` | WSE server version |
| `protocol_version` | `int` | Negotiated protocol version (minimum of client and server) |
| `features` | `object` | Server feature flags (compression, recovery, cluster, batching, priority_queue, msgpack) |
| `limits` | `object` | Server-enforced limits for this connection |
| `ping_interval` | `int` | Server ping interval in milliseconds |
| `connection_id` | `string` | Unique connection identifier |
| `server_time` | `string` | Server wall clock (ISO 8601) |

The negotiated protocol version is the minimum of both sides.

## Server-Initiated Ping

The server sends periodic ping messages to detect stale connections and measure round-trip latency.

**Ping interval**: every 25 seconds.

**Zombie detection**: connections that have not sent any data (including PONG responses) within 60 seconds are considered zombies and closed by the server.

### Ping Message

```json
WSE{"t":"ping","p":{"server_time":"2026-02-28T12:00:00.000Z"}}
```

### Expected Pong Response

The client must respond with a PONG containing both the original server timestamp and the client's own timestamp:

```json
{"t":"PONG","p":{"client_timestamp":1708441800050,"server_timestamp":1708441800000}}
```

The server uses the round-trip time to track connection health metrics. Clients that fail to respond within the zombie detection window are disconnected with close code 1000.

## Rate Limit Feedback

WSE enforces per-connection rate limits using a token bucket algorithm. The server provides feedback before and after limits are exceeded, giving clients the opportunity to back off gracefully.

**Default configuration**:

| Parameter | Value |
|-----------|-------|
| Bucket capacity | 100,000 tokens |
| Refill rate | 10,000 tokens/second |

### Rate Limit Warning

When 80% of the bucket is consumed (20% remaining), the server sends a warning:

```json
WSE{"t":"rate_limit_warning","v":1,"p":{
  "current_rate": 80000,
  "limit": 100000,
  "remaining": 20000,
  "retry_after": 1.0
}}
```

This gives the client a window to reduce its send rate before messages are rejected.

### Rate Limit Exceeded

When the bucket is empty, the server rejects messages with an error:

```json
WSE{"t":"error","v":1,"p":{
  "code": "RATE_LIMITED",
  "message": "Rate limit exceeded",
  "retry_after": 1.0
}}
```

| Field | Type | Description |
|-------|------|-------------|
| `code` | `string` | Error code (`RATE_LIMITED`) |
| `message` | `string` | Human-readable description |
| `retry_after` | `float` | Suggested backoff before retrying (seconds) |

The connection is not closed on rate limit violation. The client should stop sending, wait for `retry_after` seconds, and resume at a lower rate. Persistent violations may trigger the circuit breaker, which closes the connection with code 1011.

Commit message:

Replace wire prefix with c field inside JSON
- Remove WSE{/S{/U{ wire prefix from all outbound messages
- Add "c" field (category) as first field in JSON: {"c":"U","t":"bar_update",...}
- Field order: c first, t second, v last for DevTools readability
- All messages now have c field (was missing on non-snapshot events)
- Rename _msg_cat to c across server, transformer, TS and Python clients
- Rust auto-injects c for broadcast_local/broadcast/broadcast_all
- Backwards-compatible: clients still parse incoming wire prefix

docs/PROTOCOL.md, after:

# WSE Wire Protocol Specification

Version: 1 (Rust transport)

> For the cluster inter-node binary protocol, see [Cluster Protocol](CLUSTER_PROTOCOL.md).

## Message Format

All WSE messages are JSON objects with the following structure:

```json
{
  "c": "U",
  "t": "event_type",
  "id": "019c53c4-abcd-7def-8901-234567890abc",
  "ts": "2026-02-20T15:30:00.000Z",
  "seq": 42,
  "p": {
    "key": "value"
  },
  "v": 1
}
```

### Field Order

Fields are ordered for readability in DevTools: `c` first, `t` second, `v` last.

### Required Fields

| Field | Type | Description |
|-------|------|-------------|
| `c` | `string` | Message category (`"U"`, `"S"`, or `"WSE"`) |
| `t` | `string` | Event type (e.g., `user_update`, `chat_message`) |
| `id` | `string` | Unique message ID (UUID v7) |
| `ts` | `string` | ISO 8601 timestamp with timezone |
| `seq` | `int` | Monotonically increasing sequence number |
| `p` | `object` | Event payload (type-specific data) |
| `v` | `int` | Protocol version (currently `1`) |

### Optional Fields

| Field | Type | Description |
|-------|------|-------------|
| `sig` | `string` | JWT signature for signed messages |
| `pri` | `int` | Priority (1=BACKGROUND, 3=LOW, 5=NORMAL, 8=HIGH, 10=CRITICAL) |
| `cid` | `string` | Correlation ID for request/response pairing |
| `wse_processing_ms` | `int` | Server-side processing time in milliseconds |

## Message Categories

The `c` field identifies the message category:

| Value | Category | Description | Examples |
|-------|----------|-------------|----------|
| `"WSE"` | System | Protocol-level messages | `server_ready`, `ping`, `PONG`, `error` |
| `"S"` | Snapshot | Full state snapshots | `user_snapshot`, `channel_snapshot` |
| `"U"` | Update | Incremental updates | `user_update`, `chat_message` |

### Wire Format

```json
{"c":"WSE","t":"server_ready","p":{...},"v":1}
{"c":"S","t":"user_snapshot","p":{...},"v":1}
{"c":"U","t":"user_update","p":{...},"v":1}
```

No wire prefix. Category is inside the JSON object as the `c` field.

## Transport Modes

### Text Mode (default)

Standard WebSocket text frames with JSON.

### Binary Mode: Compression

When a message exceeds the compression threshold (default: 1024 bytes), the server sends a binary frame with `C:` prefix:

```
C:<zlib-compressed-data>
```

The client detects the `C:` prefix, strips it, decompresses with zlib, and parses the resulting JSON string.

### Binary Mode: Encryption

When encryption is enabled, messages are sent as binary frames with `E:` prefix:

```
E:<IV (12 bytes)><AES-GCM ciphertext + 16-byte auth tag>
```

Encryption spec:

| Parameter | Value |
|-----------|-------|
| Algorithm | AES-GCM-256 |
| IV | 12 bytes (96 bits), random per message |
| Auth tag | 16 bytes (128 bits), appended to ciphertext |
| Key exchange | ECDH P-256 with HKDF-SHA256 |
| HKDF salt | `wse-encryption` (UTF-8 bytes) |
| HKDF info | `aes-gcm-key` (UTF-8 bytes) |
| HKDF hash | SHA-256 |
| Derived key | 32 bytes (256 bits) |

**Key exchange flow:**

1. Server generates ECDH P-256 keypair during connection setup
2. Server sends its public key (65 bytes, uncompressed SEC1) in `server_ready`
3. Client generates its own ECDH keypair
4. Client derives shared secret from server's public key
5. Client sends its public key in `client_hello`
6. Server derives the same shared secret from client's public key
7. Both sides run HKDF to get the AES-256 key
8. All subsequent `E:`-prefixed messages use this key

The plaintext inside the encrypted envelope is the full message including category prefix (e.g. `U{...}`).

### Binary Mode: JSON (default since v1.1)

All JSON messages are sent as WebSocket binary frames instead of text frames. This eliminates UTF-8 validation overhead in the WebSocket layer, providing 5-15% higher throughput. The payload format is identical - category prefix followed by JSON - but delivered in a binary frame.

Clients should handle both text and binary frames containing JSON for backward compatibility.

### Binary Mode: MessagePack

For compact serialization, `M:` prefix indicates msgpack-encoded data:

```
M:<msgpack-encoded-data>
```

To opt in, connect with `?format=msgpack` query parameter:

```
ws://host:port/wse?format=msgpack
```

When enabled, all outbound messages from the server use msgpack instead of JSON. The msgpack payload contains the same fields (`t`, `p`, `id`, `ts`, `seq`, `v`) but encoded with MessagePack. No category prefix is used - the `M:` header replaces it.

Requires `@msgpack/msgpack` (JS) or `msgpack` (Python) on the client side.

## Connection Lifecycle

### 1. Connect

```
Client → Rust Server (port 5006): WebSocket UPGRADE /wse
  Cookie: access_token=<JWT>
Server → Client: 101 Switching Protocols
```

Authentication is via HTTP-only cookie (default name: `access_token`, configurable via `jwt_cookie_name`). No query parameter needed.

### 2. Authentication

Two paths depending on server configuration:

**Rust JWT (when `jwt_secret` is configured):**
1. Rust extracts JWT from cookie header during handshake (cookie name configured via `jwt_cookie_name`, default `access_token`)
2. Rust validates JWT signature, expiry, issuer, audience
3. On success: Rust sends `server_ready` immediately (zero GIL)
4. Rust pushes `AuthConnect{conn_id, user_id}` to drain queue
5. Python receives pre-validated user_id, sets up subscriptions and snapshots

**Python fallback (when `jwt_secret` is not configured):**
1. Rust pushes raw `Connect{conn_id, cookies}` to drain queue
2. Python extracts and validates JWT from cookies
3. Python sends `server_ready` after validation

The Rust JWT path eliminates GIL acquisition from the connection critical path, reducing median connection latency from ~23ms to 0.53ms.

### 3. Server Ready

Sent after authentication succeeds (from Rust when JWT is configured, from Python otherwise):

```json
WSE{"v":1,"t":"server_ready","id":"019c53c4-abcd-7def","ts":"2026-02-28T12:00:00.000Z","seq":1,"p":{
  "message": "Connection established (Rust transport)",
  "details": {
    "version": 1,
    "features": {
      "compression": true,
      "encryption": false,
      "batching": true,
      "priority_queue": true,
      "circuit_breaker": true,
      "rust_transport": true,
      "rust_jwt": true,
      "recovery": true
    },
    "connection_id": "rs_f186cd9d_019c53c4",
    "server_time": "2026-02-28T12:00:00.000Z",
    "user_id": "019c53c4-abcd-7def-8901-234567890abc"
  }
}}
```

When `rust_jwt` is `true`, JWT validation was performed by the Rust server during the handshake (before this message was sent). The `user_id` field is the validated subject from the JWT.

Encryption key exchange happens separately via `encryption_request`/`encryption_response` messages, not in `server_ready`.

### 4. Subscriptions

The Python application subscribes connections to topics via `subscribe_connection(conn_id, topics)`. Subscription management is server-side only - there is no auto-subscribe mechanism.

### 5. Updates

Real-time updates are sent via topic broadcast:

```json
U{"t":"user_update","p":{
  "user_id": "...",
  "status": "online",
  "last_seen": "2026-02-20T15:30:00.123Z"
}}
```

### 6. Heartbeat

Server sends a ping every 25 seconds:

```json
WSE{"t":"ping","p":{"server_time":"2026-02-28T12:00:00.000Z"}}
```

Client responds with a PONG echoing the server timestamp plus its own:

```json
{"t":"PONG","p":{"client_timestamp":1708441800000,"server_timestamp":1708441800050}}
```

### 7. Disconnect

- **Idle timeout**: Server closes after 60s of inactivity (code 1000)
- **Circuit breaker**: Server closes after too many errors (code 1011)
- **Auth failure**: Server closes with code 4401
- **Normal close**: Code 1000

## Presence Events

When presence tracking is enabled, the server broadcasts presence events to all subscribers of a topic.

### Presence Join (server to client)

Sent when the first connection for a user subscribes to a topic with presence data:

```json
{"t": "presence_join", "p": {"user_id": "alice", "data": {"status": "online", "name": "Alice"}}}
```

### Presence Leave (server to client)

Sent when the last connection for a user is removed from a topic:

```json
{"t": "presence_leave", "p": {"user_id": "alice", "data": {"status": "online", "name": "Alice"}}}
```

### Presence Update (server to client)

Sent when a user's presence data is updated via `update_presence()`:

```json
{"t": "presence_update", "p": {"user_id": "alice", "data": {"status": "away"}}}
```

Presence is queried through the Python API (`server.presence(topic)`, `server.presence_stats(topic)`), not through WebSocket messages.

---

## Client-to-Server Messages

### Subscribe / Unsubscribe

Subscribe with optional presence data. The `presence` field attaches user metadata for presence tracking (requires `presence_enabled=True` on the server):

```json
{
  "t": "subscription",
  "p": {
    "action": "subscribe",
    "topics": ["notifications", "chat_messages"],
    "presence": {"status": "online", "name": "Alice"}
  }
}
```

### Sync Request

Request initial data snapshots:

```json
{
  "t": "sync_request",
  "p": {
    "topics": ["notifications", "chat_messages"],
    "include_snapshots": true
  }
}
```

### Client Hello

Protocol negotiation. When encryption is enabled, includes the client's ECDH public key:

```json
{
  "t": "client_hello",
  "p": {
    "client_version": "2.0.0",
    "protocol_version": 2,
    "features": {
      "compression": true,
      "batch_messages": true,
      "encryption": true
    },
    "capabilities": ["compression", "encryption", "batching"],
    "encryption_public_key": "<base64-encoded 65-byte ECDH P-256 public key>"
  }
}
```

Once the server receives `client_hello` with `encryption_public_key`, it derives the shared AES-256 key. All subsequent messages from both sides may be sent as `E:`-prefixed encrypted binary frames.

### Config Update

Dynamic configuration:

```json
{
  "t": "config_update",
  "p": {
    "compression_enabled": true,
    "compression_threshold": 2048,
    "batching_enabled": true,
    "batch_size": 20,
    "batch_timeout": 0.2
  }
}
```

### Health Check

```json
{
  "t": "health_check",
  "p": {}
}
```

### Metrics Request

```json
{
  "t": "metrics_request",
  "p": {}
}
```

## Batching

When the client supports batching (`batch_messages: true` in features), the server may send multiple messages in a single frame:

```json
U{"t":"batch","p":{
  "messages": [
    {"t":"notification","p":{...}},
    {"t":"chat_message","p":{...}}
  ],
  "count": 2
}}
```

## Message Signing

Messages matching a configurable set of types are signed for integrity verification. The set is empty by default - configure via `signed_message_types` in the connection constructor. When `message_signing_enabled` is `True`, all messages are signed.

```json
U{"t":"my_critical_event","p":{...},"sig":"<hash>:<timestamp>:<nonce>:<hmac>","v":1}
```

The `sig` field contains an HMAC-SHA256 signature (or JWT when a TokenProvider is configured):
- `hash`: SHA-256 hash of the JSON-serialized payload
- `signed_at`: Unix timestamp
- `nonce`: Random 16-byte hex string
- `signature`: HMAC-SHA256 of `hash:signed_at:nonce`

Example signed types (domain-specific, not built into WSE):

```
payment_completed, account_transfer, config_change, ...
```

## Error Codes

| Code | Meaning |
|------|---------|
| `AUTH_FAILED` | JWT authentication failed |
| `RATE_LIMITED` | Client sending too fast |
| `MESSAGE_TOO_LARGE` | Message exceeds 1 MB limit |
| `INVALID_SUBSCRIPTION` | No topics specified |
| `INVALID_ACTION` | Unknown subscription action |
| `HANDLER_ERROR` | Server-side handler error (recoverable) |
| `CIRCUIT_BREAKER_OPEN` | Too many errors, connection closing |
| `ENCRYPTION_REQUIRED` | Operation requires encryption |
| `SERVER_ERROR` | Internal server error |
| `INIT_ERROR` | Connection initialization failed |

## WebSocket Close Codes

| Code | Meaning |
|------|---------|
| 1000 | Normal closure / idle timeout |
| 1011 | Server error / circuit breaker |
| 4401 | Authentication required |

## Topics

Topics are application-defined. WSE does not enforce any topic names - define topics that match your domain. Examples:

| Topic | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `notifications` | User notifications |
| `chat_messages` | Chat room messages |
| `system_events` | System-wide announcements |
| `user_presence` | Online/offline status updates |

Subscribe connections to topics in your `drain_inbound()` event handler using `subscribe_connection(conn_id, topics)`.

## Protocol Negotiation

After the WebSocket connection is established and the server sends `server_ready`, the client sends a `client_hello` message to negotiate protocol features, version, and capabilities. The server responds with `server_hello` confirming the negotiated settings.

### Client Hello

Sent by the client immediately after receiving `server_ready`:

```json
{
  "t": "client_hello",
  "p": {
    "client_version": "2.0.0",
    "protocol_version": 1,
    "features": {
      "compression": true,
      "batch_messages": true,
      "encryption": true,
      "msgpack": false
    },
    "capabilities": ["compression", "encryption", "batching"],
    "encryption_public_key": "<base64-encoded 65-byte ECDH P-256 public key>"
  }
}
```

| Field | Type | Description |
|-------|------|-------------|
| `client_version` | `string` | Semantic version of the client library |
| `protocol_version` | `int` | Highest protocol version the client supports |
| `features` | `object` | Feature flags the client wants to enable |
| `capabilities` | `string[]` | List of supported capability names |
| `encryption_public_key` | `string` | Client ECDH public key for key exchange (only when encryption is enabled) |

### Server Hello

Sent by the server in response to `client_hello`:

```json
WSE{
  "t": "server_hello",
  "v": 1,
  "p": {
    "server_version": "2.0.0",
    "protocol_version": 1,
    "features": {
      "compression": true,
      "recovery": true,
      "cluster": false,
      "batching": true,
      "priority_queue": true,
      "msgpack": true
    },
    "limits": {
      "max_message_size": 1048576,
      "rate_limit_capacity": 100000,
      "rate_limit_refill": 10000
    },
    "ping_interval": 25000,
    "connection_id": "conn-abc-123",
    "server_time": "2026-02-28T12:00:00.000Z"
  }
}
```

| Field | Type | Description |
|-------|------|-------------|
| `server_version` | `string` | WSE server version |
| `protocol_version` | `int` | Negotiated protocol version (minimum of client and server) |
| `features` | `object` | Server feature flags (compression, recovery, cluster, batching, priority_queue, msgpack) |
| `limits` | `object` | Server-enforced limits for this connection |
| `ping_interval` | `int` | Server ping interval in milliseconds |
| `connection_id` | `string` | Unique connection identifier |
| `server_time` | `string` | Server wall clock (ISO 8601) |

The negotiated protocol version is the minimum of both sides.

## Server-Initiated Ping

The server sends periodic ping messages to detect stale connections and measure round-trip latency.

**Ping interval**: every 25 seconds.

**Zombie detection**: connections that have not sent any data (including PONG responses) within 60 seconds are considered zombies and closed by the server.

### Ping Message

```json
WSE{"t":"ping","p":{"server_time":"2026-02-28T12:00:00.000Z"}}
```

### Expected Pong Response

The client must respond with a PONG containing both the original server timestamp and the client's own timestamp:

```json
{"t":"PONG","p":{"client_timestamp":1708441800050,"server_timestamp":1708441800000}}
```

The server uses the round-trip time to track connection health metrics. Clients that fail to respond within the zombie detection window are disconnected with close code 1000.

## Rate Limit Feedback

WSE enforces per-connection rate limits using a token bucket algorithm. The server provides feedback before and after limits are exceeded, giving clients the opportunity to back off gracefully.

**Default configuration**:

| Parameter | Value |
|-----------|-------|
| Bucket capacity | 100,000 tokens |
| Refill rate | 10,000 tokens/second |

### Rate Limit Warning

When 80% of the bucket is consumed (20% remaining), the server sends a warning:

```json
WSE{"t":"rate_limit_warning","v":1,"p":{
  "current_rate": 80000,
  "limit": 100000,
  "remaining": 20000,
  "retry_after": 1.0
}}
```

This gives the client a window to reduce its send rate before messages are rejected.

### Rate Limit Exceeded

When the bucket is empty, the server rejects messages with an error:

```json
WSE{"t":"error","v":1,"p":{
  "code": "RATE_LIMITED",
  "message": "Rate limit exceeded",
  "retry_after": 1.0
}}
```

| Field | Type | Description |
|-------|------|-------------|
| `code` | `string` | Error code (`RATE_LIMITED`) |
| `message` | `string` | Human-readable description |
| `retry_after` | `float` | Suggested backoff before retrying (seconds) |

The connection is not closed on rate limit violation. The client should stop sending, wait for `retry_after` seconds, and resume at a lower rate. Persistent violations may trigger the circuit breaker, which closes the connection with code 1011.
